===========
Call tester
===========

This program connects to an Asterisk server and performs call tests, i.e.
it causes one channel to call another and verifies that the call worked.

CallTest implements a small JSON server. You can use it with your favorite
monitoring system to check test results, or to manually trigger a test from
some web site or via ``curl``.

This package is a work in progress. Some planned features are not yet implemented.
Also, this README needs to be expanded and split up. Volunteers welcome.

Configuration
=============

The configuration is a YAML file and basically looks like this::

    links: 
      foo:
        channel: "SIP/foo/{nr}"
        number: "+49123456789"
      bar:
        channel: "SIP/bar/{nr}"
        number: "+49987654321"

    calls:
      ':default:':
        mode: dtmf

      foobar:
        src: foo
        dst: bar
        info: "Check that calling bar from foo works"


See ``example.cfg`` for a working version. Run ``./ct -c example.cfg
dumpcfg`` for a copy that's been pre-filled with default values.

Links
+++++

``links`` contains the Asterisk channels that CallTest can use.

These parameters are used when originating a call on the link:

* channel: The dial string used to call out on this channel. ``{nr}`` is a
  placeholder for the destination phone number.

These parameters are used when answering a call:

* number: The number to dial, when calling this link.

The ``prio`` value is used for avoiding deadlocks when acquiring links for
bidirectional tests. If identical, the link's name is used.

The ':default:' values are applied to all other entries (unless overridden),
which saves you from changing 999 identical entries.


Calls
+++++

``calls`` contains a number of (named) tests.

* src: the source link to use, i.e. to originate the call.

* dst: the destination to use, i.e. to answer the call.

* mode: How to perform a test. See below.

* timeout: Hard limit for a call's duration. If a call exceeds this,
  it is terminated and the test fails.

* url: for answer-only modes, you need a way to cause a call. For now this
  is done by fetching the data at this URL.

The ':default:' values are applied to all other entries (unless overridden),
which saves you from changing 999 identical entries.

The ``test`` subheading contains values that are relevant for running
repeated tests in the background:

* retry, repeat: seconds to delay until repeating a call, depending on
  whether the previous attempt failed or succeeded.

* warn: number of consecutive failures when the test enters "warn" state.

* fail: number of consecutive failures when the test enters "fail" state.

* skip: if True, this test can only be triggered manually.


Modes
+++++

The ``mode`` value configure how CallTest processes a call.

dtmf
----

The answering channel sends a random sequence of DTMF tones. The originator
then does the same thing. The receivers verify that the codes are correct.

When ``dtmf.may_repeat`` is set, the receiver is allowed to read duplicate DTMF
tones. This flag might be necessary with in-band signalling.

``dtmf.len`` is the number of digits to test. Typically, one digit will be
repeated. The sequence is otherwise random.

call
----

The answering channel will acknowledge that it's ringing, but then simply
hang up.

audio
-----

TODO.

Like DTMF, but both sides send a sound file instead. The sounds are
recorded. They should match, somewhat, but that's not yet tested.

ring
----

Originate-only: call this number. It should be RINGING. Then hang up.

play
----

Originate-only: call this number. It should answer. Play a sound, then
hang up.

If no ``audio.src_out`` sound is specified, simply hang up.

Optionally, ``audio.dst_in`` records incoming audio during the call.
Recording runs while the outgoing sound is playing.


fail
----

TODO.

Originate-only: call this number. The call may not go through. It must be
rejected, some time before ``ringtime``.

Also TODO: Add a flag to determine whether an intermediate ``Ringing``
state is allowed / required / prohibited.


timeout
-------

TODO.

Originate-only: call this number. The call may not go through. It must be
RINGing and then be rejected between ``ringtime`` and ``timeout`` seconds
later.


wait
----

Answer-only: wait for an incoming call, set it to RINGING, wait a few
seconds, hang up.


answer
------

Answer-only: wait for an incoming call, answer it, optionally play a sound,
optionallyÂ² record audio while the sound is playing, then hang up.

The recording will be overlaid with the outgoing sound. This is an Asterisk
limitation.


record
------

TODO.

Answer-only:  wait for an incoming call, answer it, optionally play a sound,
optionally record incoming audio until the originator hangs up.


Number format
+++++++++++++

TODO: currently caller numbers are neither transmitted nor checked.

CallTest recognizes two kinds of phone numbers: site-local extensions, and
everything else. CallTest distinguishes these by the initial '+'.

Outgoing
--------

The outgoing Asterisk channel should be able to handle both kinds directly.
If not, either drop-kick your phone provider, or write a "Local" channel
that mangles the dialled number for you. For instance, if you need to drop
the '+', use this macro::

    context mangle {
        _+! => { Dial(SIP/broken/${EXTEN:1}) }
    }

and then call ``Local/{nr}@mangle``. As another example, if you need to use
lcoal number format to dial out::

    context mangle {
        _X! => Dial(SIP/broken/${EXTEN});  // pass-thru for local extensions
        _+49123! => Dial(SIP/broken/${EXTEN:6});  // 49123: country+city
        _+49! => Dial(SIP/broken/0${EXTEN:3});  // 49: country
        // _+! => Dial(SIP/broken/00${EXTEN:1});
        _+! => Congestion();
    }

though you can probably get by with just the first and last line.

The above works for most of Europe where "00" is the international and "0"
the national prefix. If you're in the NANP (USA or Canada), you probably
want to use this macro instead::

    context mangle {
        _N! => Dial(SIP/broken/1888${EXTEN});  // 888 is your area code
        _[01]! => Dial(SIP/broken/${EXTEN});  // pass-thru for operator and long-distance
        _+1! => Dial(SIP/broken/${EXTEN:1});  // long distance
        // _+! => Dial(SIP/broken/011${EXTEN:1});  // international
        _+! => Congestion();
    }

The last line is replaced with a "Congestion" blocker so that a mistake
won't cause international charges.

Incoming
--------

CallTest will verify that, the caller's number on an incoming call matches
the number in the test's configuration's source link. If that number is
prefixed with a '+', the incoming number is converted to international
format, as per the config file, and needs to match exactly. Otherwise, the
configured number is assumed to be a local extension and must only be at
the end of the caller's.

This ensures that there's no incoming nonsense, while acknowledging that
site-local numbers often are not transmitted cleanly.

If you need Asterisk to mangle the caller's number so that it looks sane
enough for CallTest, add that to the ``calltest`` macro. For instance, to
drop a leading zero (in the NANP it's usually a 9)::

    macro calltest(typ) {
        SET(cid=${CALLERID(num)})
        switch(cid) {
            pattern 0.:
                set(CALLERID(num)=${cid:1});
                break;
            default:
                break;
        }
        Stasis("calltest", ${typ});
        Hangup();
        return;
    }

Asterisk configuration
++++++++++++++++++++++

Server connection
-----------------

Some parameters in the ``asterisk`` section require further elucidation.

* app: 

* audio: the (base of) the "sound" URL which Asterisk will use to find your
  test's outgoing sound files. Should be ``sound:/some/absolute/path``.

Test setup
----------

Asterisk needs to know how to direct incoming calls to the tester. This is
typically done with a Stasis macro. This is for ``extensions.ael``::

    macro calltest(link,nr) {
        Stasis(calltest,${link},${nr});
        Hangup();
        return;
    }

* calltest: the ``asterisk.app`` config parameter. 

* link: the name of the link, in ``asterisk.link``.

* nr: the incoming destination phone number.

You'd call this macro from your context::

    1234 => &calltest(foo,${EXTEN});

If you want to route all incoming calls on a channel to this macro, use
something like this context::

   context ext_bar {
        s => &calltest(bar,);
        i => &calltest(bar,${INVALID_EXTEN});
        _+! => &calltest(bar,${EXTEN});
        _X! => &calltest(bar,${EXTEN});
        h => Hangup();
   }

Warning::

    These calls all have no spaces after the argument-separating commas.
    This is important.

Line setup
----------

PJSIP is not very forgiving. Sample config: TODO.

In lieu of voice quality checking, which this system does not yet do, you
might want to simply set your endpoints' DTMF mode to "inband". Don't use a
compressing codec when you do this. You might need to set the test's
``dtmf_may_repeat`` option. However, in-band DTMF is not particularly
reliable and may break randomly.

The random DTMF sequence only uses digits because letters are not
universally passed on, while ``#`` and ``*`` may be interpreted and thus
swallowed by intermediate systems.

Testing
-------

This package contains an ``example.cfg`` configuration. To use it, your
``asterisk.ael`` file should contain these lines::

    macro calltest(link, nr) {
        Stasis(calltest,${link},${nr});
        Hangup();
        return;
    }

    context direct {
        _.! => &calltest(${EXTEN},);

        answer => {
            Wait(1);
            Answer();
            Wait(5);
            Hangup();
        }
        ringing => {
            Wait(1);
            Ringing();
            Wait(5);
            Hangup();
        }
        progress => {
            Wait(1);
            Progress();
            Wait(5);
            Hangup();
        }   
    }

Add this to your ``ari.conf``:

    [example]
    type = user
    password = oh_no_you_do_not
    password_format = plain

Finally, add ``enabled=yes`` to the ``[general]`` section of ``http.conf``.

After doing all of this and restarting your Asterisk (reloading "ael",
"http" and "res_ari" should work too), the command ``./ct -c example.cfg
run`` should pass.

